<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?><!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Iliad</title>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="placeholder.css"/>
   </head>
   
   <body>
      <!--#include virtual="menu.xhtml" -->
      <h2>The <em>Iliad</em> Chapters 23 and 24</h2>
      <h3>Chapter 23</h3>
      <br/>Thus they made <span class="emotion_hoverable">lamentation</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span> throughout the
      city; but the Achaeans, when they were come to the ships and the Hellespont,
      scattered each man to his own ship; howbeit the Myrmidons would <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> nowise
      suffer to be scattered,<br/>but spake among his
      war-loving comrades, saying: "Ye Myrmidons of fleet steeds, my trusty
      comrades, let us not yet loose our single-hooved horses from their cars, but
      with horses and chariots let us draw nigh and mourn <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>; for that is
      the due of the dead.<br/>Then when we have
      taken our fill of dire <span class="emotion_hoverable">lamenting</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>, we will unyoke our horses and sup here all
      together." So spake he, and they raised the <span class="action_hoverable">voice of wailing</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> all with
      one accord, and <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> was leader thereof. Then <span class="action_hoverable">thrice about the corpse they
         drave their fair-maned steeds</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, mourning the while; and among them Thetis roused
      desire of wailing.<br/>Wetted were the sands
      and wetted the armour of the warriors with their tears; so mighty a deviser of
      rout was he for whom they mourned. And among them the son of Peleus was leader
      in the vehement <span class="emotion_hoverable">lamentation</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>; <span class="action_hoverable">laying his man-slaying hands</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> upon the breast of his
      comrade: "Hail, I bid thee, O <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>, even in the house of
      <span class="character_hoverable">Hades</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>,<br/>for even now I am bringing
      to fulfillment all that aforetime I promised thee: that I would drag <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>
      hither and give him raw unto dogs to devour, and of twelve glorious sons of
      the Trojans would I cut the throats before thy pyre, in my wrath at thy
      slaying." He spake, and devised foul entreatment for goodly
      <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>,<br/>stretching him on his face in
      the dust before the bier of the son of Menoetius. And they put off, each man of
      them, their shining harnesses of bronze, and loosed their loud-neighing horses,
      and themselves sat down beside the ship of the swift-footed son of Aeacus, a
      countless host; and he made them a funeral feast to satisfy their
      hearts.<br/>Many sleek bulls bellowed about
      the knife, as they were slaughtered, many sheep and bleating goats, and many
      white-tusked swine, rich with fat, were stretched to singe over the flame of
      <span class="character_hoverable">Hephaestus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>; and everywhere about the corpse the blood ran so that one might dip
      cups therein.<br/>
      <br/>But the prince, the <span class="character_hoverable">swiftfooted son of
         Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, was led unto goodly <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span> by the chiefs of the Achaeans, that had
      much ado to persuade him thereto, so wroth at heart was he for his comrade. But
      when, as they went, they were come to the hut of <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span>, forthwith they bade
      clear-voiced heralds<br/>set upon the fire a
      great cauldron, if so be they might persuade the son of Peleus to wash from him
      the bloody gore. But he steadfastly denied them, and swore an oath thereto:
      "Nay, verily by <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, that is highest and best of gods, it may not be
      that water should come nigh my head,<br/>until such time as I have laid <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span> on the fire, and have heaped him
      a barrow, and shorn my hair withal, since never more shall a second grief
      thus reach my heart, while yet I abide among the living. Howbeit for this
      present let us yield us to the banquet we needs must loathe; but in the
      morning rouse thou the folk, king of men <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span>,<br/>to bring wood, and to make ready all that it beseemeth a
      dead man to have, whenso he goeth beneath the murky darkness, to the end
      that unwearied fire may burn him quickly from sight, and the host betake it
      to its tasks."<br/> So spake he, and
      they readily hearkened to him and obeyed,<br/>and speedily making ready each man his meal they supped, nor did thelr hearts
      lack aught of the equal feast. But when they had put from them the desire of
      food and drink, they went each man to his hut to take his rest; but the son of
      Peleus upon the shore of the loud-resounding sea<br/>lay groaning heavily amid the host of the Myrmidons, in an open
      space where the waves splashed upon the shore. And when sleep seized him,
      loosenlng the cares of his heart, being shed in sweetness round about him — for
      sore weary were his glorious limbs with speeding after <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> unto windy
      Ilios—<br/>then there came to him the
      spirit of hapless <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>, in all things like his very self, in stature and
      fair eyes and in voice, and in like raiment was he clad withal; and he stood
      above <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>' head and spake to him, saying:"Thou sleepest, and hast
      forgotten me, <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>.<br/>Not in my life
      wast thou unmindful of me, but now in my death! Bury me with all speed, that
      I pass within the gates of <span class="character_hoverable">Hades</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>. Afar do the spirits keep me aloof, the
      phantoms of men that have done with toils, neither suffer they me to join
      myself to them beyond the River, but vainly I wander through the wide-gated
      house of Hades.<br/>And give me thy hand, I
      pitifully entreat thee, for never more again shall I come back from out of
      <span class="character_hoverable">Hades</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, when once ye have given me my due of fire. Never more in life shall
      we sit apart from our dear comrades and take counsel together, but for me
      hath loathly fate<br/>opened its maw, the
      fate that was appointed me even from my birth. Aye, and thou thyself also,
      <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> like to the gods, art doomed to be brought low beneath the wall of
      the waelthy Trojans. And another thing will I speak, and charge thee, if so
      be thou wilt hearken. Lay not my bones apart from thine, <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, but <span class="action_hoverable">let
         them lie together</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, even as we were reared in your house,<br/>when Menoetius brought me, being yet a little lad,
      from Opoeis to your country, by reason of grievous man-slaying, on the day
      when I slew Amphidamus' son in my folly, though I willed it not, in <span class="emotion_hoverable">wrath</span><span class="emot_hover">wrath</span>
      over the dice. Then the knight Peleus received me into his house<br/>and reared me with kindly care and named me
      thy squire; even so let one coffer enfold our bones, a golden coffer with
      handles twain, the which thy queenly mother gave thee."<br/> Then in answer spake to him <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, swift of
      foot:"Wherefore, O head beloved, art thou come hither,<br/>and thus givest me charge about each thing?
      Nay, verily I will fulfill thee all, and will hearken even as thou biddest.
      But, I pray thee, draw thou nigher; though it be but for a little space let
      us clasp our arms one about the other, and take our fill of dire
      lamenting." So saying <span class="action_hoverable">he reached forth with his hands</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,<br/>yet clasped him not; but the spirit like a
      vapour was gone beneath the earth, gibbering faintly. And seized with amazement
      <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> sprang up, and smote his hands together, and spake a word of
      <span class="emotion_hoverable">wailing</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>:"Look you now, even in the house of <span class="character_hoverable">Hades</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> is the spirit and
      phantom somewhat, albeit the mind be not anywise therein;<br/>for the whole night long hath the spirit of hapless
      <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span> stood over me, <span class="action_hoverable">weeping and wailing</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, and gave me charge concerning
      each thing, and was wondrously like his very self." So spake he, and
      in them all aroused the desire of <span class="emotion_hoverable">lament</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>, and rosy-fingered Dawn shone forth
      upon them<br/>while yet <span class="action_hoverable">they wailed around the
         piteous corpse</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. But the lord <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span> sent forth mules an men from all sides
      from out the huts to fetch wood and a man of valour watched thereover, even
      Meriones, squire of kindly Idomeneus. And they went forth bearing in their hands
      axes for the cutting of wood<br/>and
      well-woven ropes, and before them went the mules: and ever upward, downward,
      sideward, and aslant they fared. But when they were come to the spurs of
      many-fountained Ida, forthwith they set them to fill high-crested oaks with the
      long-edged bronze in busy haste and with a mighty crash the trees kept
      falling.<br/>Then the Achaeans split the
      trunks asunder and bound them behind the mules, and these tore up the earth with
      their feet as they hasted toward the plain through the thick underbrush. And all
      the woodcutters bare logs; for so were they bidden of Meriones, squire of kindly
      Idomeneus.<br/>Then down upon the shore
      they cast these, man after man, where <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> <span class="action_hoverable">planned a great barrow</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> for
      <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span> and for himself. But when on all sides they had cast down the
      measureless wood, they sate them down there and abode, all in one throng. And
      <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> straightway bade the war-loving Myrmidons<br/>gird them about with bronze, and yoke each man his horses to
      his car. And they arose and did on their armour and mounted their
      chariots,warriors and charioteers alike. In front fared the men in chariots, and
      thereafter followed a cloud of footmen, a host past counting and in the midst
      his comrades bare <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>.<br/>And as with a
      garment <span class="action_hoverable">they wholly covered the corpse with their hair</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> that they shore off and
      cast thereon; and behind them goodly <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> clasped the head, <span class="emotion_hoverable">sorrowing</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span> the
      while; for peerless was the comrade whom he was speeding to the house of
      <span class="character_hoverable">Hades</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>.<br/> But when they were come to the
      place that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> had appointed unto them, they set down the dead, and swiftly
      heaped up for him abundant store of wood.<br/>Then again swift-footed goodly <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> took other counsel; he took his stand
      apart from the fire and <span class="action_hoverable">shore off a golden lock</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, the rich growth whereof he had
      nursed for the river Spercheüs, and his heart mightily moved, he spake, with a
      look over the wine-dark sea:"<span class="character_hoverable">Spercheüs</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, to no purpose did my father Peleus
      vow to thee<br/>that when I had come home
      thither to my dear native land, I would shear my hair to thee and offer a
      holy hecatomb, and on the selfsame spot would sacrifice fifty rams, males
      without blemish, into thy waters, where is thy demesne and thy fragrant
      altar. So vowed that old man, but thou didst not fulfill for him his
      desire.<br/>Now, therefore, seeing I
      go not home to my dear native land, I would fain give unto the warrior
      <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span> this lock to fare with him." He spake and <span class="action_hoverable">set the lock in
         the hands of his dear comrade</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, and in them all aroused the desire of <span class="emotion_hoverable">lament</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>. And
      now would the light of the sun have gone down upon their <span class="action_hoverable">weeping</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,<br/>had not <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> drawn nigh to <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span>'s side
      and said:"Son of Atreus—for to thy words as to those of none other will
      the host of the Achaeans give heed— of lamenting they may verily take their
      fill, but for this present disperse them from the pyre, and bid them make
      ready their meal; for all things here we to whom the dead is nearest and
      dearest will take due care;<br/>and with
      us let the chieftains also abide."<br/> Then when the king of men <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span> heard this word, he
      forthwith dispersed the folk amid the shapely ships, but they that were neareat
      and dearest to the dead abode there, and heaped up the wood, and made a pyre of
      an hundred feet this way and that,<br/>and <span class="action_hoverable">on
         the topmost part thereof they set the dead man</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, their hearts <span class="emotion_hoverable">sorrow-laden</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>. And
      many goodly sheep and many sleek kine of shambling gait they flayed and dressed
      before the pyre; and from them all great-souled <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> gathered the fat, and
      enfolded the dead therein from head to foot, and about him heaped the flayed
      bodies.<br/>And thereon he set two-handled
      jars of honey and oil, leaning them against the bier; and four horses with high
      arched neeks he cast swiftly upon the pyre, groaning aloud the while. Nine dogs
      had the prince, that fed beneath his table, and of these did <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> cut the
      throats of twain, and cast them upon the pyre.<br/>And twelve valiant sons of the great-souled Trojans slew he
      with the bronze—and <span class="emotion_hoverable">grim</span><span class="emot_hover">anger</span> was the work he purposed in his heart and thereto he
      set the iron might of fire, to range at large. Then he uttered a groan, and
      called on his dear comrade by name: "Hail, I bid thee, O <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>, even
      in the house of <span class="character_hoverable">Hades</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>,<br/>for now am I
      bringing all to pass, which afore-time I promised thee. Twelve valiant sons
      of the great-souled Trojans, lo all these together with thee the flame
      devoureth; but <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>, son of <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, will I nowise give to the fire to feed
      upon, but to dogs." So spake he threatening, but with <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> might no
      dogs deal;<br/>nay, the daughter of <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>,
      <span class="character_hoverable">Aphrodite</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, kept dogs from him by day alike and by night, and with oil anointed
      she him, rose-sweet, ambrosial, to the end that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> might not tear him as
      he dragged him. And over him Phoebus <span class="character_hoverable">Apollo</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> drew a dark cloud from heaven to the
      plain, and <span class="action_hoverable">covered all the place</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>whereon
      the dead man lay, lest ere the time the might of the sun should shrivel his
      flesh round about on his sinews and limbs.<br/> Howbeit the pyre of dead <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span> kindled not. Then again did swift footed
      goodly<span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> take other counsel; he took his stand apart from the pyre, and
      <span class="action_hoverable">made prayer to the two winds</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,<br/>to the North
      Wind and the West Wind, and promised fair offerings, and full earnestly, as he
      poured libations from a cup of gold, he besought them to come, to the end that
      the corpses might speedily blaze with fire, and the wood make haste to be
      kindled. Then forthwith <span class="character_hoverable">Iris</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> heard his prayer, and hied her with the message to
      the winds.<br/>They in the house of the
      fierce-blowing West Wind were feasting all together at the banquet and <span class="character_hoverable">Iris</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>
      halted from her running on the threshold of stone. Soon as their eyes beheld
      her, they all sprang up and called her each one to himself. But she refused to
      sit, and spake saying:<br/>"I may not
      sit, for I must go back unto the streams of Oceanus, unto the land of the
      Ethiopians, where they are sacrificing hecatombs to the immortals, that I
      too may share in the sacred feast. But <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> prayeth the North Wind and
      the noisy West Wind to come, and promiseth them fair offerings, that so ye
      may <span class="action_hoverable">rouse the pyre to burn</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> whereon lieth<br/><span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>, for whom all the Achaeans groan aloud."
      When she had thus departed, and they arose with a wondrous din, driving the
      clouds tumultuously before them. And swiftly they came to the sea to blow
      thereon, and the wave swelled<br/>beneath the
      shrill blast; and they came to deep-soiled Troyland, and fell upon the pyre, and
      mightily roared the wordrous blazing fire. So the whole night long as with one
      blast <span class="action_hoverable">they beat upon the flame of the pyre</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, blowing shrill; and the whole night
      long swift <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, taking a two-handled cup in hand,<br/><span class="action_hoverable">drew wine from a golden howl and poured it upon the earth, and
         wetted the ground</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, calling ever upon the spirit of hapless <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>. As a
      <span class="action_hoverable">father waileth for his son, as he burneth his bones</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, a son newly wed whose death
      has brought woe to his hapless parents, even so <span class="action_hoverable">wailed</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> for his comrade
      as he burned his bones,<br/>going heavily
      about the pyre with ceaseless groaning.<br/>
      But at the hour when the star of morning goeth forth to herald light over the
      face of the earth—the star after which followeth saffron-robed Dawn and
      spreadeth over the sea—even then grew the burning faint, and the flame thereof
      died down. And the winds went back again to return to their home<br/>over the Thracian sea, and it roared with
      surging flood. Then the <span class="character_hoverable">son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> withdrew apart from the burning pyre, and
      laid him down sore-wearied; and sweet sleep leapt upon him. But they that were
      with the son of Atreus gathered in a throng, and the noise and din of their
      oncoming aroused him;<br/>and he sat upright
      and spake to them saying:"Son of Atreus, and ye other princes of the hosts
      of Achaea, first quench ye with flaming wine the burning pyre, even all
      whereon the might of the fire hath come, and thereafter <span class="action_hoverable">let us gather the
         bones</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> of <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>, Menoetius' son, singling them out well from the
      rest;<br/>and easy they are to
      discern, for he lay in the midst of the pyre, while the others burned apart
      on the edges thereof, horses and men mingled together. Then let us place the
      bones in a golden urn wrapped in a double layer of fat until such time as I
      myself be hidden in <span class="character_hoverable">Hades</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>.<br/>Howbeit no
      huge barrow do I bid you rear with toil for him, but such a one only as
      beseemeth; but in aftertime do ye Achaeans build it broad and high, ye that
      shall be left amid the benched ships when I am gone." So spake he,
      and they hearkened to the <span class="character_hoverable">swift-footed son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>.<br/>First they quenched with flaming wine the pyre, so far as the
      flame had come upon it, and the ash had settled deep; and <span class="action_hoverable">with weeping they
         gathered up the white bones of their gentle comrade into a golden urn, and
         wrapped them in a double layer of fat, and placing the urn in the hut they
         covered it with a soft linen cloth</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>.<br/>Then
      they traced the compass of the barrow and set forth the foundations thereof
      round about the pyre, and forthwith they piled the up-piled earth. And when they
      had piled the barrow, they set them to go back again. But <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> stayed the
      folk even where they were, and made them to sit in a wide gathering; and from
      his ships brought forth prizes; cauldrons and tripods<br/>and horses and mules and strong oxen and fair-girdled women and
      grey iron.<br/> For swift charioteers first he
      set forth goodly prizes, a woman to lead away, one skilled in goodly handiwork,
      and an eared tripod of two and twenty measures<br/>for him that should be first; and for the second he appointed a
      mare of six years, unbroken, with a mule foal in her womb; and for the third he
      set forth a cauldron untouched of fire, a fair cauldron that held four measures,
      white even as the first; and for the fourth he appointed two talents of
      gold;<br/>and for the fifth a two-handled
      urn, yet untouched of fire. Then he stood up, and spake among the Argives,
      saying: "Son of Atreus, and ye other well-greaved Achaeans, for the
      charioteers these prizes lie waiting in the lists. If for some other's
      honour we Achaeans were now holding contests,<br/>surely it were I that should win the first prize, and bear
      it to my hut; for ye know how far my horses twain surpass in excellence,
      seeing they are immortal, and it was <span class="character_hoverable">Poseidon</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> that gave them to my father
      Peleus, and he gave them to me. Howbeit I verily will abide, I and my
      single-hooved horses,<br/>so valiant and
      glorious a charioteer have they lost, and one so kind, who full often would
      pour upon their manes soft soil when he had washed them in bright water. For
      him <span class="action_hoverable">they stand and mourn</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, and on the ground their manes are trailing, and
      the twain stand there, grieving at heart.<br/>But do ye others make yourselves ready throughout the host,
      whosoever of the Achaeans hath trust in his horses and his jointed
      car."<br/> So spake the <span class="character_hoverable">son of
         Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, and the swift charioteers bestirred them. Upsprang, for the first,
      Eumelus, king of men, Admetus' dear son, a man well-skilled in
      horsemanship<br/>and after him upsprang
      Tydeus' son, mighty Diomedes, and led beneath the yoke the horses of Tros, even
      them that on a time he had taken from Aeneas, albeit <span class="character_hoverable">Apollo</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> snatched away
      Aeneas' self; and after him uprose Atreus' son, fair-haired Menelaus, sprung
      from <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, and led beneath the yoke swift steeds, Aethe, <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span>'s mare, and
      his own horse Podargus.<br/>The mare had
      Anchises' son Echepolus given to <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span> without price, to the end that he
      might not follow him to windy Ilios, but might abide at home and take his joy;
      for great wealth had <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> given him, and he dwelt in spaclous Sicyon:<br/>her Menelaus led beneath the yoke, and exceeding
      fain was she of the race. And fourth Antilochus made ready his fair-maned
      horses, he the peerless son of Nestor, the king high of heart, the son of
      Neleus; and bred at Pylos were the swift-footed horses that drew his car. And
      his father drew nigh and gave counsel<br/>to
      him for his profit — a wise man to one that himself had
      knowledge."Antilochus, for all thou art young, yet have <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> and
      <span class="character_hoverable">Poseidon</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> loved thee and taught thee all manner of horsemanship; wherefore to
      teach thee is no great need, for thou knowest well how to wheel about the
      turning-post; yet are thy horses slowest in the race: therefore I deem there
      will be sorry work for thee. The horses of the others are swifter, but the
      men know not how to devise more cunning counsel than thine own self.
      Wherefore come, dear son, lay thou up in thy mind cunning of every sort, to
      the end that the prizes escape thee not.<br/>By cunning, thou knowest, is a woodman far better than by
      might; by cunning too doth a helmsman on the wine-dark deep guide aright a
      swift ship that is buffeted by winds; and by cunning doth charioteer prove
      better than charioteer. <br/> Another man,
      trusting in his horses and car,<br/>heedlessly wheeleth wide to this side and that, and his horses roam over
      the course, neither keepeth he them in hand; whereas he that hath crafty
      mind, albeit he drive worse horses, keepeth his eye ever on the turning-post
      and wheeleth close thereby, neither is unmindful how at the first to force
      his horses with the oxhide reins,<br/>but
      keepeth them ever in hand, and watcheth the man that leadeth him in the
      race. Now will I tell thee a manifest sign that will not escape thee. There
      standeth, as it were a fathom's height above the ground, a dry stump,
      whether of oak or of pine, which rotteth not in the rain, and two white
      stones on either side<br/>thereof are
      firmly set against it at the joinings of the course, and about it is smooth
      ground for driving. Haply it is a monnment of some man long ago dead, or
      haply was made the turning-post of a race in days of men of old; and now
      hath switft-footed goodly <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> appointed it his turningpost. Pressing
      hard thereon do thou drive close thy chariot and horses, and thyself lean in
      thy well-plaited<br/>car a little to the
      left of the pair, and to the off horse do thou give the goad, calling to him
      with a shout, and give him rein from thy hand. But to the post let the near
      horse draw close, that the nave of the well-wrought wheel seem to graze the
      surface thereof—<br/>but be thou ware of
      touching the stone, lest haply thou wound thy horses and wreck thy car; so
      should there be joy for the rest, but reproach it for thyself. Nay, dear
      son, be thou wise and on thy guard; for if at the turning-post thou shalt
      drive past the rest in thy course,<br/>there is no man that shall catch thee by a burst of speed, neither pass
      thee by, nay, not though in pursuit he were driving goodlyArion, the swift
      horse of Adrastus, that was of heavenly stock, or those of Laomedon, the
      goodly breed of this land." So saying Nestor, son of Neleus, sate him
      down again in his place,<br/>when he had told
      his son the sum of every matter.<br/> And
      fifth Meriones made ready his fair-maned horses. Then they mounted their cars,
      and cast in the lots; and <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> shook them, and forth leapt the lot of
      Nestor's son, Antilochus; after him had the lord Eumelus a place,<br/>and next to him Atreus' son, Menelaus, famed for
      his spear, and next to him Meriones drew his place; and last of all the son of
      Tydeus, albeit far the best, drew a place for his chariot. Then took they their
      places in a row, and <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> shewed them the turning-post afar off in the
      smooth plain; and thereby he set as an umpire<br/>godlike Phoenix, his father's follower, that he might mark the
      running and tell the truth thereof. Then they all at one moment lifted the lash
      each above his yoke of horses, and smote them with the reins, and called to them
      with words, full eagerly and forthwith they sped swiftly over the
      plain<br/>away from the ships and beneath
      their breasts the dust arose and stood, as it were a cloud or a whirlwind, and
      their manes streamed on the blasts of the wind. And the chariots would now
      course over the bounteous earth, and now again would bound on high; and they
      that drave<br/>stood in the cars, and each
      man's heart was athrob as they strove for victory; and they called every man to
      his horses, that flew in the dust over the plain. But when now the swift horses
      were fulfilling the last stretch of the course, back toward the grey sea, then
      verily was made manifest the worth of each,<br/>and the pace of their horses was forced to the uttermost. And forthwith the
      swift-footed mares of the son of Pheres shot to the front, and after them
      Diomedes' stallions of the breed of Tros; not far behind were they, but close
      behind, for they seemed ever like to mount upon<br/>Eumelus' car, and with their breath his back waxed warm and his
      broad shoulders, for right over him did they lean their heads as they flew
      along. And now would Tydeus' son have passed him by or left the issue in doubt,
      had not Phoebus Apollo waxed wroth with him and smitten from his hand the
      shining lash.<br/>Then from his eyes ran tears
      in his <span class="emotion_hoverable">wrath</span><span class="emot_hover">wrath</span> for that he saw the mares coursing even far swiftlier still than
      before, while his own horses were hampered, as running without goad. <br/>But Athene was not unaware of Apollo's cheating
      of the son of Tydeus, and right swiftly sped she after the shepherd of the
      host,<br/>and gave him back the lash and
      put strength into his horses. Then in wrath was she gone after the son of
      Admetus, and the goddess brake the yoke of his steeds, and to his cost the mares
      swerved to this side and that of the course, and the pole was swung to the
      earth; and Eumelus himself was hurled from out the car beside the
      wheel,<br/>and from his elbows and his
      mouth and nose the skin was stripped, and his forehead above his brows was
      bruised; and both his eyes were filled with tears and the flow of his voice was
      checked. Then Tydeus' son turned his single-hooved horses aside and drave on,
      darting out far in advance of the rest; for Athene<br/>put strength in his horses and gave glory to himself. And after
      him drave the son of Atreus, fair-haired Menelaus. But Antilochus called to the
      horses of his father:"Go in now, ye twain as well; strain to your utmost
      speed. With yon steeds verily I nowise bid you strive,<br/>with the horses of wise-hearted Tydeus to the which
      Athene hath now given speed and vouchsafed glory to him that driveth them.
      But the horses of the son of Atreus do ye overtake with speed, and be not
      outstripped of them, lest shame be shed on you by Aethe that is but a mare.
      Why are ye outstripped, good steeds?<br/>For thus will I speak out to you, and verily it shall be brought to pass:
      no tendance shall there be for you twain with Nestor, the shepherd of the
      host, but forthwith will he slay you with the sharp bronze, if through your
      heedlessness we win but a worse prize. Nay, have after them with all speed
      ye may,<br/>and this will I myself
      contrive and plan, that we slip past them in the narrow way; it shall not
      escape me." So spake he, and they, seized with fear at the rebuke of
      their master, ran swiftlier on for a little time, and then quickly did
      Antilochus, staunch in fight, espy a narrow place in the hollow road.<br/>A rift there was in the ground, where the water,
      swollen by winter rains, had broken away a part of the road and had hollowed all
      the place. There drave Menelaus in hope that none other might drive abreast of
      him. But Antilochus turned aside his single-hooved horses, and drave on outside
      the track, and followed after him, a little at one side.<br/>And the son of Atreus was seized with fear, and shouted
      to Antilochus: "Antilochus, thou art driving recklessly; nay, rein in thy
      horses! Here is the way straitened, but presently it will be wider for
      passing; lest haply thou work harm to us both by fouling my
      car."<br/> So spake he, but
      Antilochus drave on even the more hotly,<br/>and plied the goad, as he were one that heard not. And far is the range of a
      discus swung from the shoulder, which a young man hurleth, making trial of his
      strength, even so far ran they on; but the mares of the son of Atreus gave back,
      for of his own will he forbare to urge them,<br/>lest haply the single-hooved horses should clash together in
      the track, and overturn the well-plaited cars, and themselves be hurled in the
      dust in their eager haste for victory. Then fair-haired Menelaus chid
      Antilochus, and said:"Antilochus, than thou is none other of mortals more
      malicious.<br/>Go, and perdition take
      thee, since falsely did we Achaeans deem thee wise. Howbeit even so shalt
      thou not bear off the prize without an oath." So said he, and called to
      his horses, saying: "Hold not back, I bid you, neither stand ye still with
      <span class="emotion_hoverable">grief</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span> at heart. Their feet and knees will grow weary<br/>before yours, for they both are lacking in
      youth." So spake be, and they, seized with fear at the rebuke of
      their master, ran swiftlier on, and quickly came close anigh the others. But the
      Argives sitting in the place of gathering were gazing at the horses, that flew
      amid the dust over the plain.<br/>And the
      first to mark them was Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, for he sat without the
      gathering, the highest of all, in a place of outlook, and when he heard the
      voice of him that shouted, albeit afar off, he knew it; and he was ware of a
      horse, shewing clear to view in front, one that was a bay all the rest of him,
      but on his forehead was<br/>a white spot round
      like the moon. And he stood up, and spake among the Argives saying:"My
      friends, leaders and rulers of the Argives, is it I alone that discern the
      horses, or do ye as well? Other are they, meseemeth, that be now in
      front,<br/>and other is the charioteer
      that appeareth; and the mares will have come to harm out yonder on the
      plain, they that were in front on the outward course. For in truth I marked
      them sweeping first about the turning-post, but now can I nowhere spy them,
      though mine eyes glance everywhither over the Trojan plain, as I
      gaze.<br/>Did the reins haply slip
      from the charioteer, and was he unable to guide the course aright about the
      post, and did he fail in the turn? Even there, methinks, must he have been
      hurled to earth, and have wrecked his car, and the mares must have swerved
      from the course in wild terror of heart. Howbeit stand ye up also, and look;
      for myself<br/>I discern not clearly, but
      the man seemeth to me to be an Aetolian by race, and is king among the
      Argives, even the son of horse-taming Tydeus, mighty
      Diomedes."<br/> Then shamefully
      chid him swift Aias, son of Oïleus:"Idomeneus, why art thou a braggart
      from of old? Nay, still afar off are<br/>the high-stepping mares speeding over the wide plain. Neither art thou so
      far the youngest among the Argives, nor do thine eyes look forth from thy
      head so far the keenliest yet thou ever pratest loudly. It beseemeth thee
      not to be loud of speech, for here be others better than thou.<br/>The selfsame mares are in the lead, that led
      of old, even they of Eumelus, and himself he standeth firmly in the car and
      holdeth the reins." Then the leader of the Cretans waxed wroth, and
      spake in answer:"Aias, thou master of railing, witless in counsel, in all
      things else thou fallest behind the other Argives, for thy mind is
      stubborn.<br/>Come now, let us wager a
      tripod or a cauldron, and as umpire betwixt us twain let us choose Atreus'
      son <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span>, as to which mares are in the lead — that thou mayst learn by
      paying the price." So spake he, and forthwith uprose in wrath swift
      Aias, son of Oïleus, to answer him with angry words;<br/>and yet furthur would the strife between the twain have gone,
      had not <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> himself stood up, and spoken, saying:"No longer now, O
      Aias and Idomeneus, answer ye one another with angry words, with evil words,
      for that were unseemly. Ye have indignation with another, whoso should act
      thus.<br/>Nay, sit ye down in the
      place of gathering, and watch ye the horses; full soon in their eager haste
      for victory will they come hither, and then shall ye know, each man of you,
      the horses of the Argives, which be behind, and which in the lead."
      So spake he, and Tydeus' son came hard anigh as he drave,<br/>and with his lash dealt many a stroke down from the
      shoulder; and his horses leapt on high as they swiftly sped on their way. And
      ever did flakes of dust smite the charioteer, and his chariot overlaid with gold
      and tin ran on behind the swift-footed horses, and small trace there
      was<br/>of the wheel tires behind in the
      light dust, as the twain flew speeding on. Then he drew up in the midst of the
      place of gathering, and in streams the sweat flowed from the necks and chests of
      the horses to the ground. And Diomedes himself leapt to the ground from his
      gleaming car,<br/>and leaned the goad against
      the yoke. Neither did mighty Sthenelus anywise tarry, but speedily took the
      prize, and gave to his comrades, high of heart, the woman and the eared tripod
      to bear away; and himself loosed the horses from beneath the yoke.<br/> And next after him Antilochus of the stock of
      Neleus drave his horses,<br/>for that by
      guile, and nowise by speed, had he outstripped Menelaus; howbeit even so
      Menelaus guided his swift horses close behind. Far as a horse is from the wheel,
      a horse that draweth his master over the plain,and straineth at the car—the tire
      thereof do the hindmost hairs of his tail touch,<br/>for it runneth close behind, and but scant space is there
      between, as he courseth over the wide plain—even by so much was Menelaus behind
      peerless Antilochus, though at the first he was behind far as a man hurleth the
      discus; howbeit quickly was he overtaking Antilochus, for the goodly
      mettle<br/>of the mare of <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span>,
      fair-maned Aethe, waxed ever higher. And if the course had been yet longer for
      the twain, then had he passed him by, neither left the issue in doubt. But
      Meriones, valiant squire of Idomeneus, was a spear-cast behind glorious
      Menelaus,<br/>for slowest of all were his fair-maned horses, and himself least skilled to drive
      a chariot
      in the race. And the son of Admetus came in last, behind all the rest, <span class="action_hoverable">dragging his fair
         chariot</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> and driving his horses before him. And at sight of him <span class="character_hoverable">swift-footed, goodly Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> had <span class="emotion_hoverable">pity</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span><br/>and <span class="action_hoverable">he
         stood up</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> amid the Argives, and <span class="action_hoverable">spake winged words</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>: "Lo, in the last place driveth his
      single-hooved horses the man that is far the best. But come, let us give him a prize,
      as is
      meet, a prize for the second place; but the first let the son of Tydeus bear away."
      So spake he,
      and <span class="action_hoverable">they all
         assented</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> even as he bade.<br/>And now would he have given him the mare —for the
      Achaeans assented thereto —but that Antilochus, son of great-souled Nestor, uprose
      and answered
      <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles, son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, to claim
      his due: "<span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, <span class="emotion_hoverable">sore wroth shall I be</span><span class="emot_hover">wrath</span> with thee if thou
      fulfill this word, for thou art <span class="action_hoverable">minded to rob me</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> of my prize,<br/>bethinking thee of this,
      how his chariot and his swift honses came to harm, and himself withal, good man though
      he be.
      Nay, <span class="action_hoverable">he should have made
         prayer to the immortals, then had he nowise come in last of all in the race.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> But if
      so be thou <span class="emotion_hoverable">pitiest him</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>, and he be dear to thy heart, lo, in thy hut is great store of gold,
      and bronze is there<br/>and sheep, aye, and handmaids too, and single-hooved horses. Thereof do
      thou hereafter take and give him even a goodlier prize, or even now forthwith, that
      the Achaeans
      may applaud thee. But the mare will not yield; for her let any man that will, essay
      to do battle
      with me by might of hand."<br/>
      <br/>So spake he, and <span class="character_hoverable">swift-footed, goodly
         Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> smiled, <span class="emotion_hoverable">having joy</span><span class="emot_hover">relief</span> in Antilochus, for that
      he was his dear comrade; and he made answer, and <span class="action_hoverable">spake to him winged words</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>:"Antilochus, if thou wilt have men
      give to Eumelus some other thing from out my house as a further prize, even this will
      I
      do.<br/>I will give him the corselet that I took from Asteropaeus; of bronze is it, and thereon
      is set in circles a casting of bright tin, and it shall be to him a thing of great
      worth."
      <span class="action_hoverable">He spake, and bade his
         dear comrade</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> Automedon bring it from the hut and <span class="action_hoverable">he went and brought it</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,<br/>and placed it in
      Eumelus' hands and <span class="action_hoverable">he
         received it gladly.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> Then among them uprose also Menelaus, <span class="action_hoverable">sore vexed at heart, furiously
         wroth at Antilochus; and a herald gave the staff into his hand, and proclaimed silence
         among
         the Argives; and thereafter spake among them the godlike man:</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>
      <br/>"Antilochus, thou that aforetime wast wise, what a thing hast thou wrought! Thou hast
      put
      my skill to shame and hast thwarted my horses, thrusting to the front thine own that
      were worser
      far. Come now, ye leaders and rulers of the Argives, judge ye aright betwixt us twain,
      neither
      have regard unto either,<br/>lest in aftertime some one of the brazen-coated Achaeans shall say:
      ‘Over Antilochus did Menelaus prevail by lies, and depart with the mare, for that
      his horses
      were worser far, but himself the mightier in worth and in power.’ Nay, but I will
      myself declare
      the right, and I deem that<br/>none other of the Danaans shall reproach me, for my judgement
      shall be just. Antilochus, fostered of <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, up, come thou
      hither and, as is the appointed way, stand thou before thy horses and chariot, and
      take in hand
      the slender lash with which aforetimethou wast wont to drive, and laying thy hand
      on thy horses
      swear by him that holdeth and shaketh the earth<br/>that not of thine own will didst thou hinder
      my chariot by guile." <br/> Then in turn <span class="action_hoverable">wise Antilochus answered him:</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> "Bear with me, now, for far
      younger am I than thou, king Menelaus, and thou art the elder and the better man.
      Thou knowest
      of what sort are the transgressions of a man that he is young,<br/>for hasty is he of purpose
      and but slender is his wit. Wherefore let thy heart be patient; the mare that I have
      won will I
      give thee of my self. Aye, and if thou shouldst ask some other goodlier thing from
      out my house,
      forthwith were I fain to give it thee out of hand, rather than all my days be cast
      out of thy
      heart, thou nurtured of <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>,<br/>and be a sinner in the eyes
      of the gods." So spake the son of great-souled Nestor, and <span class="action_hoverable">led up the mare, and gave her into the hands of
         Menelaus.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> And <span class="emotion_hoverable">his heart was gladdened</span><span class="emot_hover">relief</span> even as the corn when with the dew
      upon the ears it waxeth ripe, what time the fields are bristling.<br/>In such wise, Menelaus,
      was thy heart gladdened in thy breast. Then <span class="action_hoverable">he spake winged words unto Antilochos</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, saying: "Antilochus,
      lo now, I of myself cease from mine anger against thee, since nowise flighty or light
      of wit
      wast thou of old, albeit now hath thy youth got the better of thy reason.<br/>Another time seek
      not to outwit thy betters. Verily not soon should another of the Achaeans have persuaded
      me, but
      thou hast suffered greatly and toiled greatly, thou and thy brave father and thy brother,
      for my
      sake; wherefore I will hearken to thy prayer, aye,<br/>and will give unto thee the mare, for all
      she is mine own, to the end that these too may know that my heart is never over-haughty
      neither
      unbending." He spake, and <span class="action_hoverable">gave the mare unto Nosmon</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, the comrade of Antilochus, to lead away, and himself
      thereafter <span class="action_hoverable">took the shining
         cauldron</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. And <span class="action_hoverable">Meriones took up the two talents of gold</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> in the fourth place,<br/>even as he
      drave; but the fifth prize was left unclaimed, even the two-handled urn. Unto Nestor
      Achilles
      <span class="action_hoverable">gave this</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,
      bearing it through the gathering of the Argives; and <span class="action_hoverable">he came to his side, and said</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>"Take this
      now, old sire, and let it be treasure for thee, a memorial of Patroclus' burying;
      for nevermore
      shalt thou behold him<br/>among the Argives. Lo, I give thee this prize unwon; for not in boxing
      shalt thou contend, neither in wrestling, nor shalt thou enter the lists for the casting
      of
      javelins, neither run upon thy feet; for now grievous old age weigheth heavy upon
      thee." <br/>
      So saying <span class="action_hoverable">he placed the urn
         in his arms</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, and <span class="action_hoverable">Nestor received it gladly</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,<br/>and <span class="action_hoverable">spake, and addressed him with
         winged words</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> :"Aye, verily, my son, all this hast thou spoken aright, for my limbs,
      even my feet, are no more firm, O my friend, as of old, nor do my arms as of old dart
      out
      lightly from my shoulders on either side. Would that I were young, and my strength
      were
      firm<br/>as on the day when the Epeians were burying lord Amarynceus at Buprasium, and his
      sons
      appointed prizes in honour of the king. Then was there no man that proved himself
      my peer,
      neither of the Epeians nor of Pylians themselves nor of the great-souled Aetolians.
      In boxing I
      overcame Clytomedes, son of Enops,<br/>and in wrestling Ancaeus of Pleuron, who stood up against
      me; Iphiclus I outran in the foot-race, good man though he was; and in casting the
      spear I
      outthrew Phyleus and Polydorus. In the chariot race alone the twain sons of Actor
      outstripped me
      by force of numbers crowding their horses to the front, being exceeding jealous for
      victory,<br/>for that the goodliest prize abode yet there in the lists. Twin brethren were they—
      the one drave with sure hand, drave with sure hand, while the other plied the goad.
      Thus was I
      on a time, but now let men that be younger face such-like tasks; me it behoveth to
      yield to
      grievous old age,<br/>but then was I pre-eminent among warriors. But come, for thy comrade too
      hold thou funeral rites with contests. <span class="action_hoverable">For this gift, I receive it wlth gladness, and my heart rejoiceth
         that thou rememberest me, thy friend, neither am I forgotten of thee, and the honour
         wherewith it beseemeth that I be honoured among the Achaeans.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>And to thee may
      the gods in requital thereof grant grace to satisfy thy heart." So spake he, and <span class="character_hoverable">the son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> went his way through the
      great throng of the Achaeans, when he <span class="action_hoverable">had hearkened to all the praise</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> of the son of Neleus. Then set
      <span class="action_hoverable">he forth prizes</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>
      for grievous boxing. A sturdy mule he brought and tethered in the place of gathering,<br/>a mule
      of six years, unbroken, the which is hardest of all to break; and for him that should
      be worsted
      he appointed a two-handled cup. Then he stood up, and spake among the Argives, saying:
      "Son of
      Atreus, and ye other well-greaved Achaeans, <span class="action_hoverable">for these prizes we invite warriors twain, the best there are, to
         lift up their hands and box amain.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>Let him to whom <span class="character_hoverable">Apollo</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> shall grant strength to endure, and all the Achaeans have knowledge
      thereof, go his way to his hut leading the sturdy muIe; but he that is worsted shall
      bear as his
      prize the two-handled cup."<br/> So spake he, and forthwith <span class="action_hoverable">uprose a man valiant and
         tall</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,<br/>well-skilled in boxing, even Epeius, son of Panopeus; and <span class="action_hoverable">he laid hold of the sturdy mule,
         and spake,</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> saying:"Let him draw nigh, whoso is to bear as his prize the two-handled
      cup : the mule I deem that none other of the Achaeans shall lead away, by worsting
      me with his
      fists, for I avow me to be the best man.<br/>Sufficeth it not that I fall short in battle? One
      may not, meseemeth, prove him a man of skill in every work. For thus will I speak,
      and verily
      this thing shall be brought to pass : <span class="action_hoverable">utterly will I rend his flesh and crush his bones.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> Wherefore
      let them that be next of kin abide here in a throng,<br/>that they may bear him forth when
      worsted by my hands." So spake he, and <span class="action_hoverable">they all became hushed in silence.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> Euryalus alone <span class="action_hoverable">uprose to face him</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, a
      godlike man, son of king Mecisteus, son of Talaus, who on a time had come to Thebes
      for the
      burial of Oedipus,<br/>when he had fallen, and there had worsted all the sons of Cadmus. And
      Tydeus' son, famed for his spear, made Euryalus ready, <span class="action_hoverable">heartening him with words, and much he wished for
         him victory.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> A girdle first he cast about him, and thereafter gave him well-cut
      thongs of the hide of an ox of the field.<br/>So the twain, <span class="action_hoverable">when they had girded themselves, stepped into the
         midst of the place of gathering, and lifting their mighty hands on high one against
         the
         other, fell to, and their hands clashed together in heavy blows. Dread then was the
         grinding
         of their teeth, and the sweat flowed on every side from off their limbs</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> But upon
      him <span class="action_hoverable">goodly Epeius
         rushed</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>as he peered for an opening,and smote him on the cheek, nor after that,
      methinks, did he long stand upright, for even there did <span class="action_hoverable">his glorious limbs sink beneath him</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. And as
      when beneath the ripple of the North Wind a fish leapeth up on the tangle-strewn sand
      of a
      shallow, and then the black wave hideth it, even so <span class="action_hoverable">leapt up Euryalus when he was smitten</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. But
      great-souled Epeius<br/><span class="action_hoverable">took him in his hands and set him on his feet, and his dear comrades thronged about
         him and
         led him through the place of gathering with trailing feet, spitting out clotted blood
         and
         letting his head hang to one side; and they brought him wandering in his wits and
         set him
         down in the midst of their company, and themselves went and fetched the two-handled
         cup.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>
      <br/>Then the son of Peleus forthwith <span class="action_hoverable">ordained in the sight of the Danaans other prizes for a third contest,
         even for toilsome wrestling</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> — for him that should win, a great tripod to stand upon
      the fire, that the Achaeans prized amongst them at the worth of twelve oxen; and for
      him that
      should be worsted he set in the midst a woman<br/>of manifold skill in handiwork, and they
      prized her at the worth of four oxen. And <span class="action_hoverable">he stood up and spake among the Argives saying</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>:"Up now, ye
      twain that will make essay likewise in this contest." So spake he, and <span class="action_hoverable">thereat arose great Telamonian
         Aias, and up stood Odysseus of many wiles, he of guileful mind.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/><span class="action_hoverable">Then the twain, when they had
         girded themselves, stepped into the midst of the place of gathering, and laid hold
         each of
         the other in close grip with their mighty hands, even as the gable-rafters of a high
         house,
         which some famous craftsman joineth together, that he may have shelter from the might
         of the
         winds.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">And their backs creaked
         beneath the violent tugging of bold hands</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,<br/><span class="action_hoverable">and the sweat flowed down in streams; and many a
         weal, red with blood, sprang up along their ribs and shoulders; and ever they strove
         amain
         for victory, to win the fashioned tripod.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> Neither might Odysseus avail to trip Aias
      and throw him to the ground,<br/>nor Aias him, for <span class="action_hoverable">the mighty strength of Odysseus held firm.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> But when at the
      last they were like to weary the well-greaved Achaeans, <span class="action_hoverable">then unto Odysseus spake great Telamonian Aias,
         saying</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>:"Zeus-born, son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, lift thou me, or let me
      lift thee; but the issue shall rest with <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>." <br/><span class="action_hoverable">He spake, and lifted him; but
         Odysseus forgat not his guile. He smote with a sure blow the hollow of Aias' knee
         from
         behind, and loosed his limbs, so that he was thrown backward, and Odysseus fell upon
         his
         chest; and the people gazed thereon and were seized with wonder.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> Then in his turn
      the much-enduring goodly Odysseus essayed to lift,<br/>and moved him a little from the ground,
      but lifted him not, howbeit he crooked his knee within that of Aias, <span class="action_hoverable">and upon the ground the twain
         fell one hard by the other, and were befouled with dust. And now would they have sprung
         up
         again for the third time and have wrestled,</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> but that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> himself <span class="action_hoverable">uprose, and held them back</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>:<br/>"No longer strain ye now,
      neither be worn with pain. Victory is with you both; take then equa1 prizes and go
      your ways,
      that other Achaeans too may strive." So spake he, and <span class="action_hoverable">they readily hearkened to him and obeyed, and wiping
         from their bodies the dust they put upon them their tunics.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>
      <br/>Then <span class="character_hoverable">the son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> straightway
      <span class="action_hoverable">set forth other
         prizes</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> for fleetness of foot: a mixingbowl of silver, richly wrought; six measures
      it held, and in beauty it was far the goodliest in all the earth, seeing that Sidonians,
      well
      skilled in deft handiwork, had wrought it cunningly, and men of the Phoenicians brought
      it over
      the murky deep, and landed it in harbour,<br/>and gave it as a gift to Thoas; and as a ransom
      for Lycaon, son of <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, Jason's son Euneos gave it to the
      warrior <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>. This bowl did <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">set
         forth as a prize in honour of his comrade</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, even for him whoso should prove fleetest
      in speed of foot.<br/>For the second again <span class="action_hoverable">he set an ox great and rich with fat; and a half-talent in gold he
         appointed for the last.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> And <span class="action_hoverable">he stood up, and spake among the Argives saying</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>: "Up now, ye
      that will make essay likewise in this contest." So spake he, and <span class="action_hoverable">forthwith uprose</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> swift Aias, son of
      Oïleus,<br/>and Odysseus of many wiles, and after them Antilochus, Nestor's son, for he
      surpassed all the youths in swiftness of foot. <span class="action_hoverable">Then took they their places in a row, and Achilles showed them the
         goal, and a course was marked out for them from the turning-point.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> Then speedily
      <span class="action_hoverable">the son of Oïleus forged
         to the front, and close after him sped goodly Odysseus</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>;<br/>close as is the
      weaving-rod to the breast of a fair-girdled woman, when she deftly draweth it in her
      hands,
      pulling the spool past the warp, and holdeth the rod nigh to her breast; even so close
      behind
      ran Odysseus,<br/><span class="action_hoverable">and his
         feet trod in the footsteps of Aias or ever the dust had settled therein, and down
         upon his
         head beat the breath of goodly Odysseus, as he ran ever swiftly on; and all the Achaeans
         shouted to further him as he struggled for victory, and called to him as he strained
         to the
         utmost.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> But when now they were running the last part of the course, straightway
      <span class="action_hoverable">Odysseus made prayer in
         his heart</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> to <span class="character_hoverable">flashing-eyed
         Athene</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>:<br/>"Hear me, goddess, and come a goodly helper to my feet." So spake he
      in prayer, and <span class="character_hoverable">Pallas Athene</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> heard him, and <span class="action_hoverable">made his limbs light, his feet
         and his hands above</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. But when they were now about to dart forth to win the prize,
      then <span class="action_hoverable">Aias slipped as he
         ran</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>—for <span class="character_hoverable">Athene</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">hampered
         him</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>—<br/>where was strewn the filth from the slaying of the loud bellowing bulls that
      <span class="character_hoverable">swift-footed Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> had slain in
      honour of <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>; and with <span class="action_hoverable">the filth of the bulls were his
         mouth and nostrils filled</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>. So then much-enduring, <span class="action_hoverable">goodly Odysseus took up the bowl, seeing he came in
         the first</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, and <span class="action_hoverable">glorious Aias took the ox.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>And <span class="action_hoverable">he stood holding in his hands the horn of the ox of the field, spewing
         forth the filth</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>; and <span class="action_hoverable">he spake among the Argives</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>: "Out upon it, lo, <span class="action_hoverable">the goddess hampered me in my
         running</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, she that standeth ever by Odysseus' side like a mother, and helpeth
      him."<br/> So spake he, but <span class="action_hoverable">they all laughed merrily at him.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>Then <span class="action_hoverable">Antilochus bare away the last prize, smiling the
         while, and spake among the Argives, saying</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>: "Among you all that know it well, will
      I declare, my friends, that even to this day <span class="action_hoverable">the immortals shew honour to older men.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> For Aias is but a
      little older than I,<br/>whereas Odysseus is of an earlier generation and of earlier men—a green
      old age is his, men say—yet hard were he for any other Achaean to contend with in
      running, save
      only for Achilles." So spake he, and <span class="action_hoverable">gave glory</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> to <span class="character_hoverable">the son of Peleus, swift of foot.</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> And <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> made answer, <span class="action_hoverable">and spake to him, saying</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>:<br/>"Antilochus, not in vain shall
      thy word of praise be spoken; nay, <span class="action_hoverable">I will add to thy prize a half-talent of gold</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>." So saying,
      <span class="action_hoverable">he set it in his hands,
         and Antilochus received it gladly</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. But <span class="character_hoverable">the son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">brought and set in the
         place</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> of gathering a far-shadowing spear, and therewith a shield and
      helmet,<br/>the battlegear of Sarpedon, that <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>
      stripped from him; and he stood up, and spake among the Argives, saying:"To win these
      prizes
      invite we warriors twain, the best there are, to clothe them in their armour and take
      bronze
      that cleaveth the flesh, and so make trial each of the other before the host.<br/><span class="action_hoverable">Whoso of the twain shall first
         reach the other's fair flesh, and touch the inward parts through armour and dark blood,
         to
         him will I give this silver-studded sword</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>—a goodly Thracian sword which I took from
      Asteropaeus; and these arms let the twain bear away to hold in common;<br/>and a goodly banquet
      shall we set before them in our huts." So spake he, and thereat <span class="action_hoverable">arose great Telamonian Aias, and up rose the son of
         Tydeus, stalwart Diomedes</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. So <span class="action_hoverable">when they had armed them on either side of the throng, into the midst
         strode the twain, eager for battle</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,<br/>glaring terribly; and amazement held all
      the Achaeans. But when they were come near as <span class="action_hoverable">they advance done against the other, thrice they set upon each other,
         and thrice they clashed together</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. Then <span class="action_hoverable">Aias thrust upon the shield</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, that was
      well-balanced upon every side, but reached not the flesh, for the corselet within
      kept off the
      spear.<br/>But Tydeus' son over the great shield <span class="action_hoverable">sought ever to reach the neck with the point of his shining
         spear</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, Then verily the Achaeans, seized with fear for Aias, <span class="action_hoverable">bade them cease and take up
         equal prizes</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. Howbeit to Tydeus' son the warrior gave the great sword,<br/>bringing
      it with its scabbard and its well-cut baldric.<br/> Then the <span class="character_hoverable">son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">set forth a mass of
         rough-cast iron</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, which of old the mighty strength of Eëtion was wont to hurl; but
      him had <span class="character_hoverable">swift-footed goodly Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
      slain, and bare this away on his ships with his other possessions.<br/><span class="action_hoverable">And he stood up, and spake
         among the Argives</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, saying :"Up now, ye that will make essay likewise in this
      contest. Though his rich fields lie very far remote, <span class="action_hoverable">the winner hereof will have it five revolving years
         to serve his need</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>; for not through lack of iron will his shepherd or
      ploughman<br/>fare to the city; nay, this will supply them." So spake he, and <span class="action_hoverable">thereat arose Polypoetes,
         staunch in fight, and the mighty strength of godlike Leonteus, and Aias, son of Telamon,
         and
         goodly Epeius.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> Then <span class="action_hoverable">they took their places in order</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, and goodly Epeius grasped
      the mass,<br/>and <span class="action_hoverable">whirled
         and flung it</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>; and <span class="action_hoverable">all the Achaeans laughed aloud</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> thereat. Then in turn
      Leonteus, scion of Ares,<span class="action_hoverable">
         made a cast</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>; and thirdly great Telamonian Aias <span class="action_hoverable">hurled it from his strong hand, and sent it past the
         marks of all</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. But when Polypoetes, staunch in fight,<br/>grasped the mass, far as a
      herdsman flings his crook, and <span class="action_hoverable">it flieth whirling over the herds of kine, even so far cast he it
         beyond all the gathering; and the folk shouted aloud. And the comrades of strong Polypoetes
         rose up and bare to the hollow ships the prize of the king.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>
      <br/>Then <span class="action_hoverable">for the archers he
         set forth as a prize dark iron—ten double axes laid he down, and ten single; and he
         set up
         the mast of a dark-prowed ship far off in the sands, and with a slender cord made
         fast
         thereto by the foot a timorous dove, and bade shoot thereat.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>"<span class="action_hoverable">Whoso shall hit the timorous
         dove let him take up all the double axes and bear them home, and whoso shall hit the
         cord,
         albeit he miss the bird: lo, his is the worser shot; he shall bear as his prize the
         single
         axes.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>"<br/> So spake he, and <span class="action_hoverable">there arose</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> the might of the prince Teucer,<br/>and Meriones
      the valiant squire of Idomeneus. <span class="action_hoverable">Then took they the lots and shook them in a helmet of bronze, and
         Teucer drew by lot the first place. Forthwith he let fly an arrow with might, howbeit
         he
         vowed not that he would sacrifice to the king a glorious hecatomb of firstling
         lambs.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>So he <span class="action_hoverable"> missed the bird</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, for <span class="character_hoverable">Apollo</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>
      <span class="emotion_hoverable">grudged him</span><span class="emot_hover">anger</span> that, <span class="action_hoverable">but hit the cord beside its foot wherewith the bird was tied, and
         clean away the bitter arrow cut the cord. Then the dove darted skyward, and the cord
         hung
         loose toward earth;</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> and <span class="action_hoverable">the Achaeans shouted aloud</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>.<br/>But Meriones <span class="action_hoverable">speedily snatched the bow from
         Teucer's hand—an arrow had he long been holding while Teucer aimed</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>—and <span class="action_hoverable">vowed forthwith that he would
         sacrifice</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> to <span class="character_hoverable">Apollo</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> that smiteth afar a glorious
      hecatomb of firstling lambs. High up beneath the cloud <span class="action_hoverable">he spied the timorous dove</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>;<br/>there as she
      circled round <span class="action_hoverable">he struck her
         in the midst beneath the wing, and clean through passed the shaft, and fell again
         and fixed
         itself in the ground before the foot of Meriones; but the dove, lighting on the mast
         of the
         dark-prowed ship, hung down her head, and her thick plumage drooped.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span><br/>Swiftly
      <span class="action_hoverable">the life fled from her
         limbs, and she fell far from the mast; and the people gazed thereon and were seized
         with
         wonder.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">And Meriones took up all ten
         double axes, and Teucer bare the single to the hollow ships.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> Then <span class="character_hoverable">the son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">brought and set in the place
         of gathering a far-shadowing spear</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>and a cauldron, that the fire had not yet
      touched, of an ox's worth, embossed with flowers; and men that were hurlers of javelins
      arose.
      Up rose the son of Atreus, <span class="character_hoverable">wide-ruling
         Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span> and Meriones, the valiant squire of Idomeneus. But among them spake
      <span class="character_hoverable">swift-footed, goodly
         Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>:<br/>"Son of Atreus, we know how far thou excellest all, and how far thou
      art the best in might and in the casting of the spear; nay, <span class="action_hoverable">take thou this prize and go thy way to the hollow
         ships; but the spear let us give to the warrior Meriones,</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> if thy heart consenteth
      thereto: so at least would I have it:" <br/>So spake he, and <span class="character_hoverable">the king of men, Agamemnon</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span>, failed not to hearken. Then
      <span class="action_hoverable">to Meriones he gave the
         spear of bronze, but the warrior handed to the herald Talthybius the beauteous
         prize.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>
      
      <br/><span class="action_hoverable">Then was the gathering
         broken up, and the folk scattered, each man to go to his own ship. The rest bethought
         them of
         supper and of sweet sleep, to take their fill thereof</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>; but <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">wept,
         ever remembering his dear comrade</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, neither might sleep,<br/>that mastereth all, lay hold
      of him, but he turned him ever to this side or to that, <span class="emotion_hoverable">yearning for the man-hood
         and valorous might</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span> of <span class="character_hoverable">Patroclus</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>, thinking on all
      he had wrought with him and all the woes he had borne, passing though wars of men
      and the grievous
      waves. Thinking thereon <span class="action_hoverable">he
         would shed big tears</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>,<br/>lying now upon his side, now upon his back, and now upon his
      face; and then again <span class="action_hoverable">he would
         rise upon his feet and roam distraught along the shore of the sea.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> Neither would he fail
      to mark the Dawn, as she shone over the sea and the sea-beaches, but would yoke beneath
      the car his
      swift horses,<br/>and bind <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">behind the chariot to drag him
         withal; and when he had haled him thrice about the barrow of the dead son of Menoetius</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>,
      he would rest again in his hut, but would leave <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>
      outstretched on his face in the dust. Howbeit <span class="character_hoverable">Apollo</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">kept all defacement from his
         flesh, pitying the warrior</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>even in death, and with the golden aegis he covered him
      wholly, that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> might not tear his body as he dragged
      him.<br/> Thus <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> in his <span class="emotion_hoverable">fury</span><span class="emot_hover">wrath</span> did
      foul despite unto <span class="character_hoverable">goodly Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>; but the
      blessed gods had pity on him as they beheld him, and bestirred the keen-sighted Argeiphontes
      to
      steal away the corpse.<br/>And the thing was pleasing unto all the rest, yet not unto <span class="character_hoverable">Hera</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> or <span class="character_hoverable">Poseidon</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> or the flashing-eyed
      maiden, but they continued even as when at the first sacred Ilios became hateful in
      their eyes and
      <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> and his folk, by reason of the sin of Alexander, for that
      he put reproach upon those goddesses when they came to his steading,<br/><span class="action_hoverable">and gave precedence to her who
         furthered his fatal lustfulness.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> But when at length the twelfth morn thereafter was come,
      then <span class="action_hoverable">among the immortals
         spake</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>
      <span class="character_hoverable">Phoebus Apollo</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>:"Cruel are ye, O ye gods, and workers of bane.
      Hath <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> then never burned for you thighs of bulls and goats
      without blemish?<br/>Him now have ye not the heart to save, a corpse though he be, for his wife to
      look upon and his mother and his child, and his father <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> and
      his people, who would forthwith burn him in the fire and pay him funeral rites. Nay,
      it is
      <span class="character_hoverable">the ruthless Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, O ye gods, that ye
      are fain to succour,<br/><span class="emotion_hoverable">him whose mind is nowise right, neither the purpose in his
         breast one that may be bent; but his heart is set on cruelty,</span><span class="emot_hover">anger</span> even as a lion that at the
      bidding of his great might and lordly spirit goeth forth against the flocks of men
      to win him a
      feast; even so hath <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> lost all pity, neither is shame
      in his heart,<br/>the which harmeth men greatly and profiteth them withal. Lo, it may be that a man
      hath lost one dearer even than was this—a brother, that the selfsame mother bare,
      or haply a son;
      yet verily when he hath wept and wailed for him he maketh an end; for an enduring
      soul have the
      Fates given unto men.<br/>But this man, when he hath reft <span class="character_hoverable">goodly Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> of life, bindeth him behind his chariot and draggeth
      him about the barrow of his dear comrade; in sooth neither honour nor profit shall
      he have
      therefrom. Let him beware lest we wax wroth with him, good man though he be; for lo,
      in his fury he
      doth foul despite unto senseless clay." <br/>Then <span class="emotion_hoverable">stirred to anger</span><span class="emot_hover">anger</span> spake to him
      <span class="character_hoverable"> white-armed Hera</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>:"Even this might be as thou
      sayest, Lord of the silver bow, if indeed ye gods will vouchsafe like honour to <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> and to <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>. <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> is but mortal and was suckled at a woman's breast, but <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> is the child of a goddess that I mine own self<br/>fostered
      and reared, and gave to a warrior to be his wife, even to Peleus, who was heartily
      dear to the
      immortals. And all of you, O ye gods, came to her marriage, and among them thyself
      too didst sit at
      the feast, thy lyre in thy hand, O thou friend of evil-doers, faithless ever."<br/> Then <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus, the cloud-gatherer,</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">answered her</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, and said:<br/>"<span class="character_hoverable">Hera</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, be not thou utterly
      wroth against the gods; the honour of these twain shall not be as one; howbeit <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> too was dearest to the gods of all mortals that are in Ilios. So
      was he to me at least, for nowise failed he of acceptable gifts. For never was my
      altar in lack of
      the equal feast,<br/>the drink-offiering and the savour of burnt-offering, even the worship that is
      our due. Howbeit of the stealing away of bold <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> will we
      naught; it may not be but that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> would be ware
      thereof; for verily his mother cometh ever to his side alike by night and day. But
      I would that one
      of the gods would call Thetis to come unto me,<br/>that I may speak to her a word of wisdom, to the
      end that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> may accept gifts from <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, and give <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> back." So spake
      he, and storm-footed Iris <span class="action_hoverable">hasted to bear his message</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, and midway between Samos and rugged Imbros she leapt into
      the dark sea, and the waters sounded loud above her.<br/>Down sped she to the depths hike a plummet
      of lead, the which, set upon the horn of an ox of the field, goeth down bearing death
      to the
      ravenous fishes. And she found Thetis in the hollow cave, and round about her other
      goddesses of
      the sea sat in a throng, and she in their midst<br/>was wailing for the fate of her peerless son,
      who to her sorrow was to perish in deep-soiled Troy, far from his native land. And
      swift-footed
      Iris drew near, and spake to her:"Rouse thee, 0 Thetis; <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>,
      whose counsels are everlasting, calleth thee." Then spake in answer Thetis, the silver-footed
      goddess:<br/>"Wherefore summoneth me that mighty god? I have shame to mingle in the company of
      the
      immortals, seeing I have measurehess griefs at heart. Howbeit I will go, neither shall
      his word be
      vain, whatsoever he shall speak."<br/> So saying, the fair goddess took a dark-hued veil, than
      which was no raiment more black,<br/>and<span class="action_hoverable"> set out to go, and before her wind-footed swift Iris led the way</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>; and
      about them the surge of the sea parted asunder. And when they had stepped forth upon
      the beach they
      sped unto heaven; and they found the son of Cronos, whose voice is borne afar, and
      around him sat
      gathered together all the other blessed gods that are for ever.<br/>Then she sate her down beside
      father <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, and <span class="character_hoverable">Athene</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> gave
      place. And <span class="character_hoverable">Hera</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> set in her hand a fair golden cup, and spake
      words of cheer.; and Thetis drank, and gave back the cup. Then among them <span class="action_hoverable">the father of men and gods was first
         to speak</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>:"Thou art come to Olympus, 0, goddess Thetis,<br/>for all thy sorrow, though
      thou hast comfortless grief at heart; I know it of myself; yet even so will I tell
      thee wherefore I
      called thee hither. For nine days' space hath strife arisen among the immortals as
      touching the
      corpse of <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> and <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles, sacker of cities</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>. They are for bestirring the
      keen-sighted Argeiphontes to steal the body away,<br/>yet herein do I accord honour unto <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>; for I would fain keep in time to come thy worship and thy
      love. Haste thee with all speed to the host and declare unto thy son my bidding. Say
      unto him
      <span class="action_hoverable">that the gods are angered
         with him</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, and that <span class="emotion_hoverable">I above all immortals am filled with wrath</span><span class="emot_hover">wrath</span>, for that in the fury of his
      heart<br/>he holdeth <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> at the beaked ships and gave him
      not back, if so be he may be seized with fear of me and give <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> back. But I will send forth Iris unto <span class="character_hoverable">great-hearted Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, to bid him go to the ships of the Achaeans to
      ransom his dear son, and <span class="action_hoverable">to
         bear gifts</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> unto <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> which shall make glad his heart."<br/>
      <br/>So spake he, and the goddess, silver-footed Thetis, failed not to hearken, <span class="action_hoverable">but went darting down from the peaks
         of Olympus, and came to the hut of her son.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> There she found him <span class="action_hoverable">groaning ceaselessly</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, and
      round about him his dear comrades with busy haste were making ready their early meal,<br/>and in
      the hut a ram, great and shaggy, lay slaughtered for them. Then she,<span class="action_hoverable">his queenly mother, sate her down close by his side and
         stroked him with her hand, and spake, and called him by name</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>:"My child, how long wilt
      thou devour thine heart with weeping and sorrowing, and wilt take no thought of food,<br/>neither
      of the couch? Good were it for thee even to have dalliance in a woman's embrace. For,
      I tell thee,
      thou shalt not thyself be long in life, but even now doth death stand hard by thee
      and mighty fate.
      But hearken thou forthwith unto me, for I am a messenger unto thee from Zeus. He declareth
      that
      that <span class="emotion_hoverable">the gods are
         angered with thee</span><span class="emot_hover">anger</span>,<br/>and that <span class="emotion_hoverable">himself above all immortals is filled with wrath</span><span class="emot_hover">wrath</span>, for that
      in the fury of thine heart thou holdest <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> at the beaked
      ships, and gavest him not back. Nay come, give him up, and take ransom for the dead."
      Then in
      answer to her spake <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles, swift of
         foot</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>: "So let it be; whoso bringeth ransom, let him bear away the dead,<br/>if verily
      with full purpose of heart the Olympian himself so biddeth." On this wise amid the
      gathering of the
      ships mother and son spake many winged words one to the other, but the son of Cronos
      sent forth
      Iris to sacred Ilios:"Up, go, swift Iris; leave thou the abode of Olympus<br/>and bear tidings
      within Ilios unto <span class="character_hoverable">great-hearted Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> that he
      go to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom his dear son, and that <span class="action_hoverable">he bear gifts</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> unto <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> which shall make glad his heart; alone let him go, neither let any man
      beside of the Trojans go with him. A herald may attend him, an elder man,<br/>to guide the mules
      and the light-running waggon, and to carry back to the city the dead, even him that
      <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> slew. Let not death be in his thoughts. neither any fear; such
      a guide will we give him, even Argeiphontes, who shall lead him, until in his leading
      he bring him
      nigh to <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>.<br/>And when he shall have led him into the
      hut, neither shall <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> himself slay him nor suffer any
      other to slay; for not without wisdom is he, neither without purpose, nor yet hardened
      in sin; nay,
      with all kindliness will he spare a suppliant man."<br/> So spake he, and storm-footed Iris hasted
      to bear his message.<br/>She came to the house of <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, and
      found therein <span class="action_hoverable">clamour and
         wailing</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>. His <span class="action_hoverable">sons
         sat about their father within the court sullying their garments with their tears,
         and in their
         midst was the old king close-wrapped in his mantle; and upon the old man's head and
         neck was filth
         in abundance</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>,<br/>which he had gathered in his hands as he grovelled on the earth. And
      <span class="action_hoverable">his daughters and his sons'
         wives were wailing throughout the house</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, bethinking them of the warriors many and valiant
      who were lying low, slain by the hands of the Argives. And the messenger of Zeus drew
      nigh to
      <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, and spake to him;<br/>softly she uttered her voice, yet
      trembling gat hold of his himbs:"Be of good courage, O <span class="character_hoverable">Priam, son of Dardanus</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, and fear thou not at all. Not to forbode any evil to thee am
      I come hither, but with good intent. I am a messenger to thee from <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, who far away though he be, hath exceeding care for thee and pity.<br/>The
      Olympian biddeth thee ransom goodly <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>, and <span class="action_hoverable">bear gifts to</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>
      <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> which shall make glad his heart; alone do thou go,
      neither let any man beside of the Trojans go with thee. A herald may attend thee,
      an elder man, to
      guide the mules and the light-running waggon,<br/>and to carry back to the city the dead, even him
      that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> slew. Let not death be in thy thoughts, neither
      any fear; such a guide shall go with thee, even Argeiphontes, who shall lead thee,
      until in his
      heading he bring thee nigh to <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>. And when he shall
      have led thee into the hut,<br/>neither shall <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
      himself slay thee nor suffer any other to slay; for not without wisdom is he, neither
      without
      purpose, nor yet hardened in sin; nay, with all kindliness will he spare a suppliant
      man." When she
      had thus spoken swift-footed Iris departed; but the king bade his sons<br/>make ready the running
      mule waggon, and bind the wicker box thereon. And himself <span class="action_hoverable">he went down to the vaulted treasure-chamber</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,
      fragrant of cedar wood and high of roof, that held jewels full many: and he called
      to him Hecabe
      his wife, and spake:"Lady, from <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> hath an Olympian messenger
      come to me,<br/>that I go to the ships of the Achaeans to ransom my dear son, and that I bear gifts
      to <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> which shall make glad his heart. But come, tell
      me this, how seemeth it to thy mind? For as touching mine own self, wondrously doth
      the desire of
      my heart bid me go thither to the ships, into the wide camp of the Achaeans."<br/>
      <br/>So spake he, but <span class="action_hoverable">his
         wife uttered a shrill cry, and spake in answer</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>:"Ah, woe is me, whither now is gone the
      wisdom for the which of old thou wast famed among stranger folk and among them thou
      rulest? How art
      thou fain to go alone to the ships of the Achaeans to meet the eyes of the man who<br/>hath slain
      thy sons, many and valiant? Of iron verily is thy heart. For if so be he get thee
      in his power and
      his eyes behold thee, so savage and faithless is the man, he will neither pity thee
      nor anywise
      have reverence. Nay, let us now make our lament afar from him we mourn, abiding here
      in the hall.
      On this wise for him did mighty Fate spin<br/>with her thread at his birth, when myself did bear
      him, that he should glut swift-footed dogs far from his parents, in the abode of a
      violent man, in
      whose inmost heart I were fain to fix my teeth and feed thereon; then haply might
      deeds of requital
      be wrought for my son, seeing in no wise while playing the dastard was he slain of
      him,<br/>but
      while standing forth in defence of the men and deep-bosomed women of Troy, with no
      thought of
      shelter or of flight." Then <span class="action_hoverable">in answer spake unto her the old man</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>, <span class="character_hoverable">god-like
         Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>:"Seek not to stay me that am fain to go, neither be thyself a bird of ill-boding
      in my halls; thou shalt not persuade me.<br/>For if any other of the men that are upon the face of
      the earth had bidden me this, whether of seers that divine from sacrifice or of priests,
      a false
      thing might we deem it, and turn away therefrom the more; but now—for myself I heard
      the voice of
      the goddess and looked upon her face—I will go forth, neither shall her word be vain.
      And if it be
      my fate<br/>to lie dead by the ships of the brazen-coated Achaeans, so would I have it; forthwith
      let <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable">slay me, when once I have
         clasped in my arms my son, and have put from me the desire for wailing</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>."<br/> He spake,
      and opened the goodly lids of chests, wherefrom he took twelve beauteous robes<br/>and twelve
      cloaks of single fold, and as many coverlets, and as many white mantles, and therewithal
      as many
      tunics. And of gold he weighed out and bare forth talents, ten in all, and two gleaming
      tripods,
      and four cauldrons, and a cup exceeding fair, that the men of Thrace had given him<br/><span class="action_hoverable">when he went thither on an embassage,
         a great treasure; not even this did the old man spare in his halls, for he was exceeding
         fain to
         ransom his dear son.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> Then drave he all the Trojans from out the portico, and chid them
      with words of reviling:"Get ye hence, wretches, ye that work me shame!<br/>Have ye not also
      lamentation at home, that ye come hither to vex me? Count ye it not enough that <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus, son of Cronos</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, hath brought this sorrow upon me,
      that I should lose my son the best of all? Nay, but yourselves too shall know it,
      for easier shall
      ye be, now he is dead, for the Achaeans to slay.<br/>But for me, or ever mine eyes behold the city
      sacked and laid waste, may I go down into the house of <span class="character_hoverable">Hades</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>." He
      spake, and plying his staff went among the men, and they went forth from before the
      old man in his
      haste. Then called he aloud to his sons, chiding Helenus and Paris and goodly Agathon<br/>and
      Pammon and Antiphonus and Polites, good at the war-cry, and Deiphobus and Hippothous
      and lordly
      Dius. To these nine the old man called aloud, and gave command:"Haste ye, base children
      that are my
      shame; would that ye all together in <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>'s stead had been
      slain at the swift ships!<br/>Woe is me, that am all unblest, seeing that I begat sons the best in
      the broad land of Troy, yet of them I avow that not one is left, not godlike Nestor,
      not Troilus
      the warrior charioteer, not <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> that was a god among men,
      neither seemed he as the son of a mortal man, but of a god:<br/>all them hath Ares slain, yet these
      things of shame are all left me, false of tongue, nimble of foot, peerless at beating
      the floor in
      the dance, robbers of lambs and kids from your own folk. <span class="action_hoverable">Will ye not make me ready a waggon, and that with speed, and
         lay all these things therein, that we may get forward on our way?</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>"<br/><br/>And the old man, <span class="character_hoverable">godlike Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, answered him: "If thou art indeed a squire of <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles, Peleus' son</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
      come now, tell me all the truth, whether <span class="character_hoverable">my son</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> is even yet by the ships or whether by
      now <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> hath <span class="action_hoverable">hewn him limb from limb and cast him before his dogs.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>" <br/>Then again the
      messenger Argeiphontes spake to him:"Old sire, <span class="action_hoverable">not yet have dogs and birds devoured him, but still
         he lieth there beside the ship of <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> amid the huts as he was at the first; and this is now
         the twelfth day that he lieth there, yet his flesh decayeth not at all,<br/>neither do worms
         consume it, such as devour men that be slain in fight</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>. Truly <span class="action_hoverable"><span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> draggeth him ruthlessly about
         the barrow of <span class="character_hoverable"> Patroclus his dear comrade</span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span></span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>, so oft as <span class="character_hoverable">sacred Dawn</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> appeareth, howbeit he marreth him not; thou
      wouldst thyself marvel, wert thou to come and see<span class="action_hoverable"> how dewy-fresh he lieth, and is washen clean of
         blood,</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>neither hath anywhere pollution;<span class="action_hoverable"> and all the wounds are closed wherewith he was
         stricken, for many there were that drave the bronze into his flesh.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> <span class="action_hoverable">In such wise do the <span class="character_hoverable">blessed
            gods</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> care for <span class="character_hoverable">thy son</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>, a corpse though he be, seeing he was dear unto <span class="character_hoverable">their</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> hearts.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>" So spake he,
      and the <span class="character_hoverable">old man</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> <span class="emotion_hoverable">waxed glad</span><span class="emot_hover">relief</span>, and answered, saying:<br/>"My child, a good thing is it in sooth e'en
      to give to the immortals such gifts as be due; for never did my son—as sure as ever
      such a one
      there was—forget in our halls the gods that hold Olympus; wherefore they have remembered
      this for
      him, even though he be in the doom of death. But come, <span class="action_hoverable">take thou from me this fair goblet</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>,<br/>and
      guard me myself, and guide me with the speeding of the gods, until I be come unto
      the hut of the
      <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles son of Pe1eus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>." And again the messenger, Argeiphontes, spake to him:"Thou dost make trial of me,
      old sire, that am younger than thou; but thou shalt not prevail upon me, seeing thou
      biddest me
      take gifts from thee while <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> knoweth naught thereof.<br/><span class="emotion_hoverable">Of him have I fear and awe at
         heart, that I should defraud him, lest haply some evil befall me hereafter.</span><span class="emot_hover">fear</span> Howbeit as thy guide
      would I go even unto glorious Argos, attending thee with kindly care in a swift ship
      or on foot;
      nor would any man make light of thy guide and set upon thee."<br/>
      <br/>So spake the Helper, and leaping upon the chariot behind the horses quickly grasped
      in his
      hands the lash and reins, and breathed great might into the horses and mules. But
      when they were
      come to the walls and the trench that guarded the ships, even as the watchers were
      but now busying
      them about their supper,<br/>upon all of these the messenger Argeiphontes shed sleep, <span class="action_hoverable">and forthwith
         opened the gates, and thrust back the bars, and brought within Priam, and the splendid
         gifts upon
         the wain</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. But when they were come to the hut of <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles Peleus' son</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, the lofty hut which the Myrmidons had
      builded for their king,<br/>hewing therefor beams of fir —and they had roofed it over with downy
      thatch, gathered from the meadows; and round it they reared for him, their king, a
      great court with
      thick-set pales; and the door thereof was held by one single bar of fir that<br/>three Achaeans
      were wont to drive home, and three to draw back the great bolt of the door （three
      of the rest, but
      <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> would drive it home even of himself）—then verily the helper <span class="character_hoverable">Hermes</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> opened the door for the
      old man, and brought in the glorious gifts for the <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles swift-footed son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>; and from the chariot
      he stepped down to the ground and spake, saying: <br/>"Old sire, I that am come to thee am immortal
      god, even <span class="character_hoverable">Hermes</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>; for <span class="character_hoverable">the Father</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> sent me to guide thee on thy way. But now verily will I go back,
      neither come within <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>' sight; good cause for wrath would it be that an immortal god should
      thus openly be entertained of mortals.<br/>But go thou in,<span class="action_hoverable"> and clasp the knees of the <span class="character_hoverable"> Achilles, son of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
         and entreat him by his father and his fair-haired mother and his child, that thou
         mayest stir his
         soul."</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/> So spake <span class="character_hoverable">Hermes</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, and departed unto high Olympus; and <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> leapt from his chariot to
      the ground,<br/>and left there Idaeus, who abode holding the horses and mules; <span class="action_hoverable">but <span class="character_hoverable">the old man</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> went
         straight toward the house where <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles, dear to Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, was wont to sit.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> Therein he found <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>&gt;,
      but his comrades sat apart: two only, the warrior Automedon and Alcimus, scion of
      <span class="character_hoverable">Ares</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>,<br/>waited
      busily upon him; <span class="action_hoverable">and he was newly ceased from meat, even from eating and drinking, and the table
         yet stood by his side</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>. <span class="action_hoverable"><span class="emotion_hoverable">Unseen of these <span class="character_hoverable">great Priam </span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>entered in, and coming close to <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>,
            clasped in his hands his knees, and kissed his hands, the terrible, man-slaying hands
            that had
            slain his many sons.</span><span class="emot_hover">fear</span></span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/>And as when sore blindness of heart cometh upon a man, that in his own
      country slayeth another and escapeth to a land of strangers, to the house of some
      man of substance,
      <span class="action_hoverable"> and wonder holdeth them that look upon him; <span class="emotion_hoverable">even so was <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> seized with wonder</span><span class="emot_hover">wonder</span> at sight of
         <span class="character_hoverable">godlike Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, and <span class="emotion_hoverable">seized with wonder were the others likewise</span><span class="emot_hover">wonder</span>, and they glanced one at the
         other.<br/>But Priam made entreaty, and spake to him, saying: "Remember thy father, O <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles like
            to the gods</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, whose years are even as mine, on the grievous threshold of old age. Him full likely
         the dwellers that be round about are entreating evilly, neither is there any to ward
         from him ruin
         and bane.<br/>Howbeit, while he heareth of thee as yet alive he hath joy at heart, and therewithal
         hopeth day by day that he shall see his dear son returning from Troy-land. But I—I
         am utterly
         unblest, seeing I begat sons the best in the broad land of Troy, yet of them I avow
         that not one is
         left.<br/>Fifty I had, when the sons of the Achaeans came; nineteen were born to me of the
         self-same womb, and the others women of the palace bare. Of these, many as they were,
         furious <span class="character_hoverable">Ares</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>
         hath loosed the knees, and he that alone was left me, that by himself guarded the
         city and the
         men,<br/>him thou slewest but now as he fought for his country, even <span class="character_hoverable">Hector.</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> </span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>
      <span class="action_hoverable"> For his sake am I now
         come to the ships of the Achaeans to win him back from thee, and I bear with me ransom
         past
         counting. Nay, have thou awe of the gods, <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, and </span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><span class="action_hoverable">take pity on me, remembering thine own
         father. Lo, I am more piteous far than he,<br/>and have endured what no other mortal on the face of
         earth hath yet endured, to reach forth my hand to the face of him that hath slain
         my sons."</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/> <span class="action_hoverable">So
         spake he, and in <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>"&gt; he roused desire<span class="emotion_hoverable"> to weep for his father</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>; and he took the <span class="character_hoverable">old man</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> by the
         hand, and gently put him from him. So the twain bethought them of their dead, and
         wept; the one for
         <span class="character_hoverable">man-slaying Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> wept sore,<br/>the while he grovelled at <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>' feet, but <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> wept for
         <span class="emotion_hoverable"> his own father</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>, and <span class="emotion_hoverable">now again for <span class="character_hoverable"> Patroclus </span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span></span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>; and the sound of their moaning went up through the
         house. But when goodly <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> had had his fill of lamenting, and the longing therefor had
         departed from his heart and limbs,<br/>forthwith then he sprang from his seat, and raised the old
         man by his hand, pitying his hoary head and hoary beard; and he spake and addressed
         him with winged
         words:"</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> Ah, unhappy man, full many in good sooth are the evils thou hast endured in thy soul.
      <span class="action_hoverable">How
         hadst thou the heart to come alone to the ships of the Achaeans,<br/>to meet the eyes of me that
         have slain thy sons many and valiant? Of iron verily is thy heart. But come, sit thou
         upon a seat,
         and our sorrows will we suffer to lie quiet in our hearts, despite our pain; for no
         profit cometh
         of chill lament.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/><span class="action_hoverable">For on this wise have the gods spun the thread for wretched mortals, that they
         should live in pain; and themselves are sorrowless. For two urns are set upon the
         floor of <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> of
         gifts that he giveth, the one of ills, the other of blessings. To whomsoever <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus, that hurleth the
            thunderbolt,</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> giveth a mingled lot,<br/>that man meeteth now with evil, now with good; but to
         whomsoever he giveth but of the baneful, him he maketh to be reviled of man, and direful
         madness
         driveth him over the face of the sacred earth, and he wandereth honoured neither of
         gods nor
         mortals.</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> Even so unto Peleus did the gods give glorious gifts<br/>from his birth; for he excelled
      all men in good estate and in wealth, and was king over the Myrmidons, and to him
      that was but a
      mortal the gods gave a goddess to be his wife.<br/>Howbeit even upon him the gods brought evil, in
      that there nowise sprang up in his halls offspring of princely sons, but he begat
      one only son,
      doomed to an untimely fate. Neither may I tend him as he groweth old, seeing that
      far, far from
      mine own country I abide in the land of Troy, vexing thee and thy children. And of
      thee, old sire,
      <span class="action_hoverable"> we hear that of old thou wast blest</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>; how of all that toward the sea Lesbos, the seat of Macar,
      encloseth,<br/>and Phrygia in the upland, and the boundless Hellespont, over all these folk, men
      say, thou, old sire, wast preeminent by reason of thy wealth and thy sons. Howbeit
      from the time
      when the heavenly gods brought upon thee this bane, ever around thy city are battles
      and slayings
      of men. Bear thou up, neither wail ever ceaselessly in thy heart; <span class="action_hoverable">for naught wilt thou avail by
         <span class="emotion_hoverable">grieving for thy son,<br/>neither wilt thou bring him back to life</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span></span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>; ere that shalt thou suffer some
      other ill."<br/> <span class="action_hoverable">And the old man, <span class="character_hoverable">godlike Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, answered him:</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> "Seat me not anywise upon a chair, O
      <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles thou fostered of Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, so long as <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> <span class="action_hoverable">lieth uncared-for amid the huts</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span>;<br/><span class="action_hoverable">nay, give him back
         with speed, that mine eyes may behold him; and do thou accept the ransom, the great
         ransom, that we
         bring. So mayest thou have joy thereof, and come to thy native land, seeing that from
         the first
         thou hast spared me.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>" <span class="action_hoverable">Then with an angry glance from beneath his brows spake to him<span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> swift
         of foot:</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span><br/>"Provoke me no more, old sir; I am minded even of myself to give <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> back to thee;
      &gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt; fe9cb1715465256b0366eb238d50024609697b43
      for from <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> there came to me a messenger, even <span class="character_hoverable">the mother that bare me</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, daughter of the <span class="character_hoverable">old man
         of the sea</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>. And of thee, <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, do I know in my heart—it nowise escapeth me—that some god led thee
      to the swift ships of the Achaeans.<br/>For no mortal man, were he never so young and strong, would
      dare to come amid the host; neither could he then escape the watch, nor easily thrust
      back the bar
      of our doors. Wherefore now stir my heart no more amid my sorrows, lest, old sire,
      I spare not even
      thee within the huts,<br/>my suppliant though thou art, and so sin against the behest of <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>." So
      spake he, <span class="emotion_hoverable">and the old man was seized with fear, and hearkened to his word</span><span class="emot_hover">fear</span>. But like a lion the <span class="character_hoverable">son
         of Peleus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> sprang forth from the houses—not alone, for with him went two squires as well, even
      the
      warrior Automedon and Alcimus,<br/>they that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> honoured above all his comrades, after the
      dead <span class="character_hoverable"> Patroclus </span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>. These then loosed from beneath the yoke the horses and mules, and led within the
      herald, the crier of the old king, <span class="action_hoverable">and set him on a chair;</span><span class="act_hover">negative</span> and from the wain of goodly felloes they
      took the countless ransom for Hector's head.<br/>But they left there two robes and a fair-woven
      tunic, to the end that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span><span class="action_hoverable"> might enwrap the dead therein and so give him to be borne to his
         home</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. Then <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> called forth the hand-maids and bade them wash and anoint him, bearing him to a
      place apart that <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> might not have sight of his son, lest in grief of heart he should not
      restrain his wrath,<br/>whenso he had sight of his son, and <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>' own spirit be stirred to
      anger, and he slay him, and so sin against the behest of Zeus. <span class="action_hoverable">So when the handmaids had washed the
         body and anointed it with oil, and had cast about it a fair cloak and a tunic, then
         <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
         himself lifted it and set it upon a bier,<br/>and his comrades with him lifted it upon the polished
         waggon. Then he uttered a groan, and called by name upon his dear comrade:"Be not
         thou wroth with
         me, <span class="character_hoverable"> Patroclus </span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>, if thou hearest even in the house of Hades that I have given back goodly Hector
         to
         his dear father, seeing that not unseemly is the ransom he hath given me.<br/>And unto thee shall I
         render even of this all that is thy due."</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><br/> So spake <span class="character_hoverable">goodly Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, and went back within the
      hut and on the richly-wrought chair wherefrom he had risen sate him down by the opposite
      wall, and
      he spake unto <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, saying:"Thy son, old sire, is given back according to thy wish,<br/>and lieth
      upon a bier; and at break of day thou shalt thyself behold him, as thou bearest him
      hence; but for
      this present let us bethink us of supper. For even the fair-haired Niobe bethought
      her of meat,
      albeit twelve children perished in her halls, six daughters and six lusty sons.<br/>The sons <span class="character_hoverable">Apollo</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>
      slew with shafts from his silver bow, being wroth against Niobe, and the daughters
      the archer
      <span class="character_hoverable">Artemis</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, for that Niobe had matched her with fair-cheeked <span class="character_hoverable">Leto</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, saying that the goddess had borne
      but twain, while herself was mother to many; wherefore they, for all they were but
      twain, destroyed
      them all.<br/>For nine days' space they lay in their blood, nor was there any to bury them, for
      the
      son of Cronos turned the folk to stones; howbeit on the tenth day the gods of heaven
      buried them;
      and Niobe bethought her of meat, for she was wearied with the shedding of tears. And
      now somewhere
      amid the rocks, on the lonely mountains,<br/>on Sipylus, where, men say, are the couching-places of
      goddesses, even of the nymphs that range swiftly in the dance about Achelous, there,
      albeit a
      stone, she broodeth over her woes sent by the gods. <span class="action_hoverable"><span class="emotion_hoverable">But come, let us twain likewise, noble old
            sire, bethink us of meat; and thereafter shalt thou make lament over thy dear son,<br/>when thou
            hast borne him into Ilios; mourned shall he be of thee many tears."</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span></span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> <span class="action_hoverable">Therewith <span class="character_hoverable">swift Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> sprang
         up, and slew a white-fleeced sheep, and his comrades flayed it and made it ready well
         and duly, and
         sliced it cunningly and spitted the morsels, and roasted them carefully and drew all
         off the
         spits.<br/>And Automedon took bread and dealt it forth on the table in fair baskets, while <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>
         dealt the meat. So they put forth their hands to the good cheer lying ready before
         them.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> But when
      they had put from them the desire of food and drink, then verily <span class="character_hoverable">Priam, son of Dardanus</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, marvelled
      at <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, how tall he was and how comely;<br/>for he was like the gods to look upon. And a son
      of Dardanus, did <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> marvel, beholding his goodly aspect and hearkening to his words. But when
      they had had their fill of gazing one upon the other, then the old man, <span class="character_hoverable">godlike Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, was first to
      speak, saying:<br/>"Show me now my bed with speed, O <span class="character_hoverable">thou nurtured of Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, that lulled at length
      by sweet sleep we may rest and take our joy; for never yet have mine eyes closed beneath
      mine
      eyelids since at thy hands my son lost his life, but ever do I wail and brood over
      my countless
      sorrows,<br/>grovelling in the filth in the closed spaces of the court. But now have I tasted of
      meat, and have let flaming wine pass down my throat; whereas till now had I tasted
      naught."<br/> He
      spake, and <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> <span class="action_hoverable">bade his comrades and the handmaids set bedsteads beneath the portico,<br/>and
         to lay on them fair purple blankets, and to spread thereover coverlets, and on these
         to put fleecy
         cloaks for clothing. So the maids went forth from the hall with torches in their hands,
         and
         straightway spread two beds in busy haste</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. Then mockingly spake unto <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles, swift of
         foot</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>:<br/>"Without do thou lay thee down, dear old sire, lest there come hither one of the
      counsellors of the Achaeans, that ever sit by my side and take counsel, as is meet.
      If one of these
      were to have sight of thee through the swift black night, forthwith might he haply
      tell it to
      <span class="character_hoverable">Agamemnon, shepherd of the host</span><span class="char_hover">Agamemnon</span>,<br/>and so should there arise delay in the giving back of the
      body. But come, tell me this, and declare it truly: for how many days' space thou
      art minded to
      make funeral for <span class="character_hoverable">goodly Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>, to the end that for so long I may myself abide, and may keep back
      the host." And the old man,<span class="character_hoverable"> godlike Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, answered him: saying:<br/>"If thou indeed art willing
      that I accomplish for goodly Hector his burial, then in doing on this wise, O <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>, wilt thou
      do according to my wish. Thou knowest how we are pent within the city, and far is
      it to fetch wood
      from the mountain, and the Trojans are sore afraid.<br/><span class="action_hoverable">For nine days' space will we wail for him
         in our halls, and on the tenth will we make his funeral, and the folk shall feast,
         and on the
         eleventh will we heap a barrow over him, and on the twelfth will we do battle, if
         so be we must.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>"
      Then spake to him in answer <span class="character_hoverable">swift-footed, goodly Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span>:"Thus shall this also be aged Priam, even
      as thou wouldest have it;<br/>for <span class="action_hoverable">I will hold back the battle for such time as thou dost bid.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>" When
      he had thus spoken he clasped the old man's right hand by the wrist, lest his heart
      should any wise
      wax fearful. So they laid them to sleep there in the fore-hall of the house, the herald
      and <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>,
      with hearts of wisdom in their breasts;<br/>but <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> slept in the innermost part of the
      well-builded hut, and by his side lay fair-cheeked Briseis.<br/> Now all the other gods and men,
      lords of chariots, slumbered the whole night through, overcome of soft sleep; but
      not upon the
      <span class="character_hoverable">helper Hermes</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> might sleep lay hold,<br/>as he pondered in mind how he should guide king <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> forth
      from the ships unmarked of the strong keepers of the gate. He took his stand above
      his head and
      spake to him, saying:"Old sire, no thought then hast thou of any evil, that thou still
      sleepest
      thus amid foemen, for that <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> has spared thee.<br/>Now verily hast thou ransomed thy son, and
      a great price thou gavest. But for thine own life must the sons thou hast, they that
      be left
      behind, give ransorn thrice so great, if so be Agamemnon, Atreus' son, have knowledge
      of thee, or
      the host of the Achaeans have knowledge." So spake he, and <span class="emotion_hoverable">the old man was seized with fear</span><span class="emot_hover">fear</span>, and
      made the herald to arise.<br/><span class="action_hoverable">And <span class="character_hoverable">Hermes</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> yoked for them the horses and mules, and himself lightly
         drave them through the camp, neither had any man knowledge thereof.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> But when they were now come to
      the ford of the fair-flowing river, even eddying Xanthus, that immortal <span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span> begat, then <span class="character_hoverable">Hermes</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>
      departed to high Olympus,<br/>and <span class="character_hoverable">Dawn</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, the saffron-robed, was spreading over the face of all the
      earth. <span class="action_hoverable">So they with moaning and wailing drave the horses to the city, and the mules bare
         the dead.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>
      Neither was any other ware of them, whether man or fair-girdled woman; but in truth
      Cassandra, peer
      of golden Aphrodite,<br/>having gone up upon Pergamus, marked her dear father as he stood in the
      car, and the herald, the city's crier; and she had sight of that other lying on the
      bier in the
      waggon drawn of the mules. Thereat she uttered a shrill cry, and called throughout
      all the
      town:"Come ye, men and women of Troy, and behold Hector,<br/>if ever while yet he lived ye had joy
      of his coming back from battle; since great joy was he to the city and to all the
      folk."<br/> So
      spake she, nor was any man left there within the city, neither any woman, for upon
      all had come
      grief that might not be borne; and hard by the gates they met <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span>, as he bare home the
      dead.<br/><span class="action_hoverable"><span class="emotion_hoverable">First Hector's dear wife and queenly mother flung themselves upon the light-running
            waggon, and clasping his head the while, wailed and tore their hair; and the folk
            thronged about
            and wept. And now the whole day long until set of sun had they made lament for Hector
            with shedding
            of tears there without the gates,<br/>had not the old man spoken amid the folk from out the
            car:"<span class="action_hoverable">Make me way for the mules to pass through; thereafter shall ye take your fill of wailing,
               when
               I have brought him to the house." So spake he, and they stood apart and made way for
               the waggon.
               But the others, when they had brought him to the glorious house,<br/>laid him on a corded bedstead,
               and by his side set singers, leaders of the dirge, who led the song of lamentation—they
               chanted the
               dirge, and thereat the women made lament. And amid these white-armed <span class="emotion_hoverable">Andromache led the wailing,</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>
               holding in her arms the while the head of <span class="character_hoverable">man-slaying Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>:<br/>"Husband, perished from out of
               life art thou, <span class="emotion_hoverable">yet in thy youth, and leavest me a widow in thy halls; and thy son is still but a
                  babe, the son born of thee and me in our haplessness; neither do I deem that he will
                  come to
                  manhood, for ere that shall this city be wasted utterly.</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span></span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. For thou hast perished that didst watch
            thereover,<br/>thou that didst guard it, and keep safe its noble wives and little children. These,
            I ween, shall soon be riding upon the hollow ships, and I among them; and thou, my
            child, shalt
            follow with me to a place where thou shalt labour at unseemly tasks, toiling before
            the face of
            some ungentle master, or else some Achaean shall seize thee by the arm<br/>and hurl thee from the
            wall, a woeful death,</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span> being wroth for that <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> slew his brother haply, or his father, or his
         son, seeing that full many Achaeans at the hands of <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span> have bitten the vast earth with their
         teeth; for nowise gentle was thy father in woeful war.<br/>Therefore the folk wail for him
         throughout the city, and grief unspeakable and sorrow hast thou brought upon thy parents,
         <span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>;
         and for me beyond all others shall grievous woes be left. For at thy death thou didst
         neither
         stretch out thy hands to me from thy bed, nor speak to me any word of wisdom whereon<br/>I might
         have pondered night and day with shedding of tears."<br/> So spake she wailing, and thereat the
         women made lament. And among them Hecabe in turns led the vehement wailing:"<span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>, far dearest to
         my heart of all my children, lo, when thou livedst thou wast dear to the gods,<br/>and therefore
         have they had care of thee for all thou art in the doom of death. For of other sons
         of mine
         whomsoever he took would swift-footed <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> sell beyond the unresting sea, unto Samos and Imbros
         and Lemnos, shrouded in smoke, but, when from thee he had taken away thy life with
         the long-edged
         bronze<br/>oft would he drag thee about the barrow of his comrade, <span class="character_hoverable"> Patroclus </span><span class="char_hover">Patroclus</span>, whom thou didst slay;
         howbeit even so might he not raise him up. all dewy-fresh thou liest in my halls as
         wert thou g
         newly slain, like as one whom Apollo of the silver bow assaileth with his gentle shafts
         and
         slayeth." <br/><span class="action_hoverable">So spake she wailing, and roused unabating lament</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>. <span class="emotion_hoverable">And thereafter Helen was the
            third to lead the wailing:</span><span class="emot_hover">lament</span>"<span class="character_hoverable">Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>, far dearest to my heart of all my husband's brethren! In sooth
         my husband is godlike Alexander, that brought me to Troy-land —would I died ere then!<br/>For this
         is now the twentieth year from the time when I went from thence and am gone from my
         native land,
         but never yet heard I evil or despiteful word from thee; nay, if so be any other spake
         reproachfully of me in the halls, a brother of thine or a sister, or brother's fair-robed
         wife,<br/>or thy mother—but thy father was ever gentle as he had been mine own—yet wouldst thou
         turn them with speech and restrain them by the gentleness of thy spirit and thy gentle
         words.
         Wherefore I wail alike for thee and for my hapless self with grief at heart; for no
         longer have I
         anyone beside in broad Troy<br/>that is gentle to me or kind; but all men shudder at me."<br/> So
         spake she wailing, and thereat the countless throng made moan. But the old man <span class="character_hoverable">Priam</span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span> spake among
         the folk, saying:<span class="action_hoverable">"Bring wood now, ye men of Troy, unto the city, neither have ye anywise fear at
            heart of a cunning ambush of the Argives</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>; for verily <span class="character_hoverable">Achilles</span><span class="char_hover">Achilles</span> laid upon me this word<br/>when he
         sent me forth from the black ships, that he would do us no hurt until the twelfth
         dawn be come." So
         spake he, and they yoked oxen and mules to waggons, and speedily thereafter gathered
         together
         before the city. For nine days' space they brought in measureless store of wood,<br/>but when the
         tenth Dawn arose, giving light unto mortals, then bare they forth <span class="character_hoverable">bold Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>, shedding tears the
         while, and on the topmost pyre they laid the dead man, and cast fire thereon.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> <span class="action_hoverable">But soon as early
         <span class="character_hoverable">Dawn appeared, the rosy-fingered</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span>, then gathered the folk about the pyre of <span class="character_hoverable">glorious Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>.<br/>And
         when they were assembled and met together, first they quenched with flaming wine all
         the pyre, so
         far as the fire's might had come upon it, and thereafter his brethren and his comrades
         gathered the
         white bones, mourning, and big tears flowed ever down their cheeks.<br/>The bones they took and
         placed in a golden urn, covering them over with soft purple robes, and quickly laid
         the urn in a
         hollow grave, and covered it over with great close-set stones. </span><span class="act_hover">positive</span><span class="action_hoverable">Then with spe'[ed heaped they the
         mound, and round about were watchers set on every side,<br/>lest the well-greaved Achaeans should
         set upon them before the time. And when they had piled the barrow they went back,
         and gathering
         together duly feasted a glorious feast in the palace </span><span class="act_hover">positive</span> of <span class="character_hoverable">Priam, the king fostered of </span><span class="char_hover">Priam</span><span class="character_hoverable">Zeus</span><span class="char_hover">Gods</span><span class="action_hoverable"> On this
         wise held they funeral for <span class="character_hoverable">horse-taming Hector</span><span class="char_hover">Hector</span>.</span><span class="act_hover">positive</span>
      
      </body>
</html>